:memo: updated how it works page (#3)
writechoiceorg/terrateam: docs/src/content/docs/how-it-works.mdx

---
title: How Terrateam Works
description: Understanding the core concepts and inner workings of Terrateam
---

import { Card, CardGrid } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
import { Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

> Terrateam is a powerful GitHub application that seamlessly integrates with your [Terraform](https://www.terraform.io/) workflow, enabling you to manage your infrastructure as code directly from your pull requests. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Terrateam is a powerful GitHub application that seamlessly integrates with your [Terraform](https://www.terraform.io/) workflow. It enables you to manage your infrastructure as code directly from your pull requests. 
```

> This page covers Terrateam’s core concepts and technical components, explaining how it integrates with GitHub and Terraform to automate infrastructure management.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: It's just saying the obvious

> This page explains the core concepts and technical components of Terrateam, helping you understand how it integrates with GitHub and Terraform to automate infrastructure management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page covers Terrateam’s core concepts and technical components, explaining how it integrates with GitHub and Terraform to automate infrastructure management.
```

> ## Core Concepts

Reviewer 2: Instead of displaying the concepts as cards, present them as bullet points. There are too many cards in this pages. It's confusing.

Author: Turned card grid into bp list

> Before diving into the technical details, let's understand some key concepts:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before diving into the technical details, it's important to understand some key concepts of Terrateam:
```

<CardGrid>

>   <Card title="Infrastructure as Code" icon="document">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <Card title="Infrastructure as Code">
```

Reviewer 2: If you use icons for one card, you must add to all cards

    Terrateam builds upon [Terraform](https://www.terraform.io/), a tool for defining infrastructure using code. If you're new to Terraform, we recommend reviewing their [documentation](https://www.terraform.io/docs) first.
  </Card>

>   <Card title="Pull Request Integration" icon="github">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <Card title="Pull Request Integration">
```

>     Terrateam brings Terraform operations directly into your GitHub pull request workflow, allowing you to plan, review, and apply infrastructure changes without leaving GitHub.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Terrateam integrates Terraform operations directly into your GitHub pull request workflow, enabling you to plan, review, and apply infrastructure changes through GitHub comments.
```

  </Card>
  <Card title="Automated Workflows" icon="refresh">
    Terrateam automates the execution of Terraform commands based on pull request events, streamlining your infrastructure management process.
  </Card>
  <Card title="Collaboration" icon="people">
    Terrateam enables team collaboration on infrastructure changes by providing clear visibility into proposed changes and their impacts.
  </Card>
</CardGrid>

## Terrateam Architecture

Terrateam consists of two main components:

<CardGrid>
  <Card title="Terrateam Server" icon="server">
    The server listens for GitHub events and determines the appropriate Terraform operation based on the event payload. It manages Terraform execution and state updates.
  </Card>

  <Card title="Terrateam Runner" icon="running">
    The runner executes Terraform commands in response to instructions from the server. It interacts with your repository and reports the results back to GitHub.
  </Card>
</CardGrid>

> ## Hierarchy of Repositories

Reviewer: "Hierarchy of Repositories" needs a real-world example or a diagram to improve clarity.
Could you talk about it with Heitor? Maybe we can add a diagram with Yan.

Reviewer 2: @lucaspr2 , use this example for now:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ca54385d-8a83-4eb3-91a8-2df4d11fe44d)

If they approve, we can improve this diagram and Yan can generates it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Repositories Hierarchy
```

Reviewer 2: We need to add more context to this section. For me at least, it's not clear the relationship between the Hierarchy and the workflow.

I believe it would be better to show to directory hierarchy first, followed by the terrateam architecture, and workflow. However, we need to clarify the relationship between the Hierarchy of repositories and the Terrateam Architecture. What's the relationship? How are they related?

We should answer these questions @lucaspr2 . If you don't know how to answer this, let me know. We can ask terrateam. But this is the kind of thing that I was expecting that was already solved.

Terrateam organizes your Terraform code using the following hierarchy:

<CardGrid>
  <Card title="Repository" icon="github">
    The top-level entity that represents your GitHub repository containing Terraform code.
  </Card>
  <Card title="Directory" icon="folder">
    A repository can contain zero or more directories, each representing a logical grouping of Terraform resources. Each directory is processed independently.
  </Card>
  <Card title="Workspace" icon="layers">
    Each directory can have one or more workspaces, allowing you to use the same Terraform code in different contexts (e.g., development, staging, production). If no workspace is specified, each directory has a default workspace.
  </Card>
</CardGrid>

This hierarchy enables you to structure your Terraform code in a modular and reusable way, making it easier to manage and maintain your infrastructure.

> ## Workflow

Reviewer: Workflow steps need a short introductory sentence to explain why the process matters.

Reviewer 2: @lucaspr2 , add this diagram to support the workflow:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0580f2ac-e766-4b7f-996b-9cb743a2ff4a)

Author: Added

2. Event Evaluation

   The Terrateam server evaluates the received event to determine if a Terraform operation needs to be executed. It analyzes the changes in the pull request and decides whether to trigger a plan or apply operation.

3. Workflow Dispatch

   If the server determines that a Terraform operation is required, it dispatches a GitHub Actions workflow to the Terrateam runner. The workflow contains the necessary information and instructions for executing the Terraform commands.

4. Terraform Execution

   The Terrateam runner receives the workflow dispatch and starts executing the Terraform operations. It clones your GitHub repository, sets up the necessary environment, and runs the Terraform commands (e.g., `terraform plan` or `terraform apply`) for each modified directory.

5. Result Reporting

   Once the Terraform execution is complete, the Terrateam runner collects the results and sends them back to the Terrateam server. The results include the output of the Terraform commands, any changes made to the infrastructure, and the overall status of the operation.

6. Feedback and Notifications

>    The Terrateam server processes the received results and provides feedback to the user. It adds comments to the pull request with the Terraform plan output, updates the status checks, and notifies the relevant stakeholders about the outcome of the operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The Terrateam server processes the received results and provides feedback to the user. It adds comments to the pull request with the Terraform plan output, updates status checks, and notifies stakeholders of the operation’s outcome.
```

  </Card>
</CardGrid>

> ## Architecture Overview

Reviewer: Maybe the "Architecture Overview" section is redundant and should be merged with "Terrateam Architecture".

Reviewer 2: This content is basically the same as the Terrateam Architecture. Let's merge those.

Author: Solved

Terrateam consists of two main components:

<CardGrid>
  <Card title="Terrateam Server" icon="server">
    The server receives GitHub events and makes decisions based on the event payload. It orchestrates the execution of Terraform operations and manages the state of your infrastructure.
  </Card>
  <Card title="Terrateam Runner" icon="running">
    The runner is responsible for executing the Terraform jobs created by the server. It interacts with your GitHub repository, performs the necessary Terraform commands, and reports the results back to the server.
  </Card>
</CardGrid>

> ### Summary

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> In this page, you've learned about the core concepts of Terrateam and how it integrates with GitHub and Terraform to enhance your infrastructure as code workflow. You now understand Terrateam's repository hierarchy, its event-driven workflow process, key features that improve collaboration and automation, and the basic architecture that powers these capabilities. With this foundation, you're ready to leverage Terrateam to streamline your infrastructure management through GitHub pull requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: The summary is relevant here.
What you could add is a Next Steps, linking the pages the user must check next.

Author: done
